---
title: 'Bioinformatic processing of microbiome sequencing data'
date: 2018-03-23
permalink: /posts/2018/03/blog-post-qiime2/
tags:
  - microbiome
  - computing
  - qiime2
  - 16s rRNA
  - DADA2

---
QIIME 2 (2018.2) is a widely used package to identity abundance of microbes using 16s ribosomal RNA (a "marker gene"). 16s rRNA has 9 hypervariable regions (V1-V9), which can be used to identify differen species. Briefly, feature table containing counts of each unique sequence in the samples will be constructed using `qiime dada2 denoise-paired` method. A feature is essentially any unit of observation, e.g., an OTU, a sequence variant, a gene or a metabolite. In QIIME2 (currently) most features will be OTUs or sequence variants (OTUs via clustering methods in q2-vsearch).

Data produced by QIIME 2 exist as QIIME 2 artifacts. A QIIME 2 artifact typically has the .qza file extension when output data stored in a file. Visualizations are another type of data (.qzv file) generated by QIIME 2, which can be viewed using a web interface [https://view.qiime2.org](https://view.qiime2.org) (at Firefox web browser) without requiring a QIIME installation. Since QIIME 2 works with artifacts instead of data files (e.g. FASTA files), we must create a QIIME 2 artifact by importing our fastq.gz data files. 

Here are some bash scripts and qsub commands that submit QIIME jobs to the cluster. `qsub` is a job submission command to Sun Grid Engine (SGE) cluster.

To find the PHRED offset used for the positional quality scores, execute the following script ([BitBucket](https://bitbucket.org/adinasarapu/clustercomputing/src/6e3396384fc31cdb4703534a4ca42d7f6a979954/fastq_manifest_phred.sh?at=master)).

```bash 
sh fastq_manifest_phred.sh
```

```bash
#!/bin/sh
# fastq_manifest_phred.sh
# checks-fastq-quality-score-format
FASTQ_FILE=$HOME/path/to/fastq.gz
zcat ${FASTQ_FILE} \
	| awk 'NR%4==0 {printf $0}' \
	| tr -d '\n' \
	| hexdump -v -e'/1 "%u\n"' \
	| head -n100000 \
	| sort -u
```

To import FASTQ files as QIIME 2 artifact and plot sequence positional quality scores, download [qiime2.2018.2_step1.sh](https://bitbucket.org/adinasarapu/clustercomputing/src/076a7a1d941a17122fb927b1f784a00db1fa2ff0/qiime2.2018.2_step1.sh?at=master&fileviewer=file-view-default) and execute as

```bash
qiime2.2018.2_step1.sh
```

To denoise imported paired sequence data and filter chimeras, QIIME 2 uses DADA2, which is an open-source software package that denoises and removes sequencing errors from Illumina amplicon sequence data, download [qiime2.2018.2_step2.sh](https://bitbucket.org/adinasarapu/clustercomputing/src/076a7a1d941a17122fb927b1f784a00db1fa2ff0/qiime2.2018.2_step2.sh?at=master&fileviewer=file-view-default) and execute as

```bash
qsub qiime2.2017.10_step2.sh
```

For indipendently processed sequencing runs, first import and denoise independently using `qiime dada2` then merge the two feature tables and two sets of representative sequences created by dada2, downlaod [qiime2.2018.2_merge.sh](https://bitbucket.org/adinasarapu/clustercomputing/src/076a7a1d941a17122fb927b1f784a00db1fa2ff0/qiime2.2018.2_merge.sh?at=master&fileviewer=file-view-default).

For feature filtering (i.e., removal of samples and features from a feature table), download [qiime2.2018.2_step3.sh](https://bitbucket.org/adinasarapu/clustercomputing/src/076a7a1d941a17122fb927b1f784a00db1fa2ff0/qiime2.2018.2_step3.sh?at=master&fileviewer=file-view-default) and execite as 

```bash
qsub qiime2.2018.2_step3.sh
```

For diversity (alpha and beta), taxonomic and comratative analyses, download the [qiime2.2018.2_step4.sh](https://bitbucket.org/adinasarapu/clustercomputing/src/076a7a1d941a17122fb927b1f784a00db1fa2ff0/qiime2.2018.2_step4.sh?at=master&fileviewer=file-view-default) and execute as

```bash
qsub qiime2.2018.2_step4.sh
```

The above analyses also produce a key summary table or BIOM (Biological Observation Matrix) file containing feature (Operational Taxonomic Units, OTUs) abundance information across samples, along with various annotations and sample metadata. Alternatively, upload BIOM file to [MicrobiomeAnalyst](http://www.microbiomeanalyst.ca), a web-based tool for comprehensive statistical, visual and meta-analysis of microbiome data, for <b>taxonomic profiling</b> - to characterize community compositions based on methods developed in ecology such as alpha-diversity (within-sample diversity) or beta-diversity (between-sample diversity) and <b>comparative analysis</b> - to identify features that are significantly different among conditions under study.  

After analyzing your data, it’s finally time to interpret your results! 

