---
title: 'Bioinformatic processing of microbiome sequencing data'
date: 2018-04-06
permalink: /posts/2018/04/blog-post-qiime2/
tags:
  - microbiome
  - computing
  - qiime2
  - 16s rRNA
  - DADA2
  - OTU

---
The 16S ribosomal RNA (rRNA) gene of Bacteria codes for the RNA component of the 30S subunit. Different bacterial species have one to multiple copies of the 16S rRNA gene, and each with 9 hypervariable regions, V1-V9. High-throughput sequencing of 16S rRNA gene (a "marker gene") amplicons has become a widely used method to study bacterial phylogeny and species classification.

Quantitative Insights Into Microbial Ecology "QIIME" 2 (release 2018.2)[^1] is a widely used package to identity abundance of microbes using 16s rRNA. Briefly, feature table containing counts of each unique sequence in the samples will be constructed using `qiime dada2 denoise-paired` method. A feature is essentially any unit of observation, e.g., an OTU (Operational Taxonomic Unit), a sequence variant, a gene or a metabolite. In QIIME2 (currently), most features will be OTUs or sequence variants (alternatively, for OTUs, use QIIME2 plugin `q2-vsearch`).

Data produced by QIIME 2 exist as QIIME 2 artifacts. A QIIME 2 artifact typically has the `.qza` file extension when output data stored in a file. Visualizations are another type of data (`.qzv` file extension) generated by QIIME 2, which can be viewed using a web interface [https://view.qiime2.org](https://view.qiime2.org) (at Firefox web browser) without requiring a QIIME installation. Since QIIME 2 works with artifacts instead of data files (e.g. FASTA files), we must create a QIIME 2 artifact by importing our `fastq.gz` data files. 

Here are some `bash` scripts that submit QIIME jobs to the cluster. `qsub` is a job submission command to Sun Grid Engine (SGE) cluster.

1. To find the PHRED offset[^2] used for the positional quality scores, use [fastq_manifest_phred.sh](https://bitbucket.org/adinasarapu/clustercomputing/src/6e3396384fc31cdb4703534a4ca42d7f6a979954/fastq_manifest_phred.sh?at=master) script.
2. To import FASTQ files as QIIME 2 artifact and plot sequence positional quality scores, use [qiime2.2018.2_step1.sh](https://bitbucket.org/adinasarapu/clustercomputing/src/076a7a1d941a17122fb927b1f784a00db1fa2ff0/qiime2.2018.2_step1.sh?at=master&fileviewer=file-view-default) script.
3. To denoise imported paired sequence data and filter chimeras, QIIME 2 uses DADA2, which is an open-source software package that denoises and removes sequencing errors from Illumina amplicon sequence data, download [qiime2.2018.2_step2.sh](https://bitbucket.org/adinasarapu/clustercomputing/src/076a7a1d941a17122fb927b1f784a00db1fa2ff0/qiime2.2018.2_step2.sh?at=master&fileviewer=file-view-default) script.
4. For denoising and merging multiple sequencing runs, first import and denoise independently using `qiime dada2`, then merge the two feature tables and two sets of representative sequences created by dada2, downlaod [qiime2.2018.2_merge.sh](https://bitbucket.org/adinasarapu/clustercomputing/src/076a7a1d941a17122fb927b1f784a00db1fa2ff0/qiime2.2018.2_merge.sh?at=master&fileviewer=file-view-default) script.
5. For feature filtering (i.e., removal of samples and features from a feature table), download [qiime2.2018.2_step3.sh](https://bitbucket.org/adinasarapu/clustercomputing/src/076a7a1d941a17122fb927b1f784a00db1fa2ff0/qiime2.2018.2_step3.sh?at=master&fileviewer=file-view-default) script.
6. For diversity (alpha and beta), taxonomic and comratative analyses, download [qiime2.2018.2_step4.sh](https://bitbucket.org/adinasarapu/clustercomputing/src/076a7a1d941a17122fb927b1f784a00db1fa2ff0/qiime2.2018.2_step4.sh?at=master&fileviewer=file-view-default) script.

When submitting the following **interactive job**, first **qlogin** and run the script.

```bash
sh fastq_manifest_phred.sh
```

To submit the following  **batch jobs** to the queues, use the `qsub` command followed by the name of your SGE batch script file.

```bash
qsub qiime2.2018.2_step1.sh
qsub qiime2.2017.10_step2.sh
qsub qiime2.2018.2_merge.sh
qsub qiime2.2018.2_step3.sh
qsub qiime2.2018.2_step4.sh
```

The above analyses also produce a key summary table or BIOM (Biological Observation Matrix) file containing feature (Operational Taxonomic Units, OTUs) abundance information across samples, along with various annotations and sample metadata. Alternatively, upload BIOM file to MicrobiomeAnalyst[^3], a web-based tool for comprehensive statistical, visual and meta-analysis of microbiome data, for <b>taxonomic profiling</b> - to characterize community compositions based on methods developed in ecology such as alpha-diversity (within-sample diversity) or beta-diversity (between-sample diversity) and <b>comparative analysis</b> - to identify features that are significantly different among conditions under study.  

After analyzing your data, it’s finally time to interpret your results!

[^1]: [https://qiime2.org](https://qiime2.org)
[^2]: [PHRED offset](http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/content/38/6/1767), The Sanger FASTQ file format for sequences with quality scores, and the Solexa/Illumina FASTQ variants.
[^3]: [MicrobiomeAnalyst](http://www.microbiomeanalyst.ca)
